Gradual Composition API Migration Cookbook recipe (#665)
vuejs/docs: src/cookbook/gradual-compositionapi-migration.md

# Gradual Composition API Migration

The [Composition API](/guide/composition-api-introduction.html) is an advanced feature introduced in Vue 3. It is purely additive, and the Options API is not legacy. You may find, however, that the Composition API can be a useful feature for more flexible large-scale architectures. So how would we go about introducing it in a larger system, gradually? What follows is merely a recommendation, there are many potential ways forward.

Due to the flexibility of the Composition API, you may need to be more explicit about organization so that future maintainers can quickly understand intended purpose of pieces of the application.

> ## Refactor your Mixins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Refactor Your Mixins
```

If you've made use of mixins for reusable logic across components, it's recommended that you start your refactor here. Mixins translate very directly.

### Base Example

Let's say we had this very small toggle mixin in `mixins/toggle.js`:

```js
const toggle = {
  data() {
    return {
      isShowing: false
    }
  },
  methods: {
    toggleShow() {
      this.isShowing = !this.isShowing
    }
  }
}
```

And it was being used in a modal component in `components/modal.vue`:

```html
<template>
  <div>
    <h3>Let's trigger this here modal!</h3>

    <button @click="toggleShow">
      <span v-if="isShowing">Hide child</span>
      <span v-else>Show child</span>
    </button>

    <div v-if="isShowing" class="modal">
      <h2>Here I am!</h2>
      <button @click="toggleShow">Close</button>
    </div>
  </div>
</template>
```

```js
<script>
  import { toggle } from '@/mixins/toggle';

  export default {
    mixins: [toggle]
  }
</script>
```

> We could refactor this by creating a `composables` folder and create `composables/useToggle.js` instead. We suggest using a directory named `composables` so that you can communicate that this is being used slightly differently from a component, it's reusable logic that you can consume.

Reviewer: This is a larger thought that I've been thinking on for some time, using this line as a way to open discussion.

I know this is starting to become more regularly used, but I'm thinking that `features` is a better name than `composables` due to the fact that these files are not required to be used in the Composition API context. Because of how Vue 3 has been rewritten internally, it would actually be more flexible to allow users the mental model of combining `features` together outside the component context as well. So in other word, `composables` seems to imply that these things are Vue specific, when other than some Vue magic, they're generally not and probably should not be given that impression.

The closest analogy to this is how `utilities` is a common folder that anyone who understand English and some programming would catch on quickly. And similarly, `features` would lower the barrier of entry. 

And in the case there are functions that require to be used in a Vue context (i.e., utilizes into lifecycle methods), then we could recommend a prefix like `setupToggle` which would be very explicit as far to its usage sine that would correlate with the `setup` method where it needs to be used.

Similarly, still need to test this out, but I wonder if `use` as a prefix will ultimately tie the concept too closely to React Hooks when the Composition API is in fact simpler and quite different from a usage / implementation perspective. And since as a verb it's fairly generic, like we would never name the lodash utilities function file "useLodash" even though we do "use" it, perhaps we should be setting precedent for more declarative verbs. So like if we're creating a new instance of toggle, "createToggle" would be more intuitive from a naming perspective.

What do you all think? @NataliaTepluhina @sdras @phanan

Author: I completely agree because for me it's actually tougher to scan so easily- `composables` and `components` are close enough in spelling that it takes me one more second to understand which one is which. I like `features` way better myself.

Author: This is updated! @yyx990803 when you take a look at this, you might want to sound off as we're defining a new convention.

Author: Oh, for the `setup` vs `use`- I agree but didn't make that change yet because I think there are already so many examples out there that have `use` as a convention, including the VueUse site, that there would probably be bigger community impacts there.

Author: For those following along, we chatted with Evan, we decided that the ship has already sailed on `use` vs `setup` though Ben makes an excellent point. We also decided to stick to `composables` for now- I'll be reverting that.

     title="Refactor Mixin to Composition API"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

Note that the template stays the same, but we've extracted the logic to use in our script section differently. If, from here, we wanted to use `isShowing` in the Options API, we could access it with `this.isShowing` now, just as we normally do with a data property, and similarly, we can access `this.toggleShow` like we would a method.

You may notice we used `reactive` here instead of `refs`. This is intentional- if you're refactoring a codebase, potentially full of many many values, `reactive` translates faster and more directly as the API is closer to Options, you're still using that same object notation.

## In Place of Vuex

It is possible to use the Composition API in place of Vuex, and save yourself a dependency. That said, it's not exactly necessary, and like many approaches, there are tradeoffs.

> If you're using Vuex, it's very clear exactly what centralized state is being used across the application. Composition API is very flexible, but you may lose that implicit declaration in communication to fellow maintainers. Our suggestion that if you do use it as a centralized state management store, that you place it in a `stateManagement` folder, or something similarly named, so that responsibilities are clear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using Vuex, it's very clear exactly what centralized state is being used across the application. In addition, you gain the benefit of using a standardized pattern that comes with officially supported tooling in the DevTools which can make a big difference when it comes to debugging code.

Composition API is very flexible, but you may lose that implicit declaration in communication to fellow maintainers. Our suggestion that if you do use it as a centralized state management store, that you place it in a `stateManagement` folder, or something similarly named, so that responsibilities are clear.
```

    }
  },
  methods: {
    async callGitHub() {
      const { hasErrors, isLoading, response, apiCall } = useFetchAPI(
        `https://api.github.com/users/sdras/repos?page=1&per_page=100`,
        {}
      )
      apiCall()
      this.gitHubData = response
      this.errors = hasErrors
      this.loading = isLoading
    }
  }
}
```

<iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/refactor-fetch-with-composition-api-klyji?fontsize=14&hidenavigation=1&theme=dark"
     style="width:100%; height:500px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
     title="Refactor Fetch with Composition API"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

The second example is reusable throughout the application across multiple components, not just for the gitHub API as the first example shows.

[VueUse](https://vueuse.js.org/) is a great resource to explore that covers many of these encapsulated use cases, ready to use in your application.

## Alternative Patterns

> Not everything needs to be refactored, though. Use judgement to guide you and not hype. The Options API can support quite a lot of use cases, and it's absolutely fine to keep your components in the Options API, and move reusable logic and/or state management to Composition API, depending on your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not everything needs to be refactored, though. Use data driven refactoring to guide you and avoid pre-optimizing when it's not necessary. The Options API is still a valid approach that will still allow you to build powerful applications. And in the event you find there's a lot of reusable logics and/or state amongst your application, that might be a good time to consider the Composition API to enhance your application!
```

Remember: the strength of the Composition API is in:

> - Reuse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reuse
- Organization
```

# Gradual Composition API Migration

The [Composition API](/guide/composition-api-introduction.html) is an advanced feature introduced in Vue 3. It is purely additive, and the Options API is not legacy. You may find, however, that the Composition API can be a useful feature for more flexible large-scale architectures. So how would we go about introducing it in a larger system, gradually? What follows is merely a recommendation, there are many potential ways forward.

> Due to the flexibility of the Composition API, you may need to be more explicit about organization so that future maintainers can quickly understand intended purpose of pieces of the application.

Author: ```suggestion
Due to the flexibility of the Composition API, you may need to be more explicit about organization so that future maintainers can quickly understand the intended purpose of pieces of the application.
```

## Refactor Your Mixins

If you've made use of mixins for reusable logic across components, it's recommended that you start your refactor here. Mixins translate very directly.

### Base Example

Let's say we had this very small toggle mixin in `mixins/toggle.js`:

```js

> const toggle = {

Author: Yep, that was left over from this originally being in codepen as one JS file, nice catch :)

  data() {
    return {
      isShowing: false
    }
  },
  methods: {
    toggleShow() {
      this.isShowing = !this.isShowing
    }
  }
}
```

And it was being used in a modal component in `components/modal.vue`:

```html
<template>
  <div>
    <h3>Let's trigger this here modal!</h3>

    <button @click="toggleShow">

>       <span v-if="isShowing">Hide child</span>

Reviewer 2: I personally use a ternary expression in an interpolation, provided the text is short enough:

```
{{ isShowing ? 'Hide' : 'Show' }} child
```

>       <span v-if="isShowing">Hide child</span>

Author: Yeah, agreed with @LinusBorg, will make that change :)

>       <span v-if="isShowing">Hide child</span>

Author: Turns out I had already updated the template sample to be more simple for the purposes of learning anyways, so this is now outdated.

      <span v-else>Show child</span>
    </button>

    <div v-if="isShowing" class="modal">
      <h2>Here I am!</h2>
      <button @click="toggleShow">Close</button>
    </div>
  </div>
</template>
```

> ```js

Author: Hm, this isn't the wrong language but I'm happy to update the whole sample to vue

<script>
  import { toggle } from '@/mixins/toggle';

  export default {
    mixins: [toggle]
  }
</script>
```

> We could refactor this by creating a `composables` folder and create `composables/useToggle.js` instead. We suggest using a directory named `composables` so that you can communicate that this is being used slightly differently from a component, it's reusable logic that you can consume.

Author: Typically with the Composition API, we use camelCasing and a prefix of `use`.

```js
export function useToggle() {
  const state = reactive({
    isShowing: false
  })

  function toggleShow() {
    state.isShowing = !state.isShowing
  }

  return {
    ...toRefs(state),
    toggleShow
  }
}
```

And we can refactor our component as follows:

```html
<template>
  <div>
    <h3>Let's trigger this here modal!</h3>

    <button @click="toggleShow">
      <span v-if="isShowing">Hide child</span>
      <span v-else>Show child</span>
    </button>

    <div v-if="isShowing" class="modal">
      <h2>Here I am!</h2>
      <button @click="toggleShow">Close</button>
    </div>
  </div>
</template>
```

```js
<script>

>   import { useToggle } from "@/composables/useToggle.js";

Author: Yep! I'll make those updates. Thanks!

  export default {
    setup() {
      const { isShowing, toggleShow } = useToggle();

      return {
        isShowing,
        toggleShow
      };
    },
  }
</script>
```

> <iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/refactor-mixin-to-composition-api-hnloh?fontsize=14&hidenavigation=1&theme=dark"

Author: Ah, yeah, I changed the sandbox to be more clear what the focus was. I'll update that. Thanks!

And yeah, it's using Vue 2 intentionally because we're showing how to gradually update from an existing Vue 2 application, not from Vue 3 greenfield.

     style="width:100%; height:500px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
     title="Refactor Mixin to Composition API"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

Note that the template stays the same, but we've extracted the logic to use in our script section differently. If, from here, we wanted to use `isShowing` in the Options API, we could access it with `this.isShowing` now, just as we normally do with a data property, and similarly, we can access `this.toggleShow` like we would a method.

> You may notice we used `reactive` here instead of `refs`. This is intentional- if you're refactoring a codebase, potentially full of many many values, `reactive` translates faster and more directly as the API is closer to Options, you're still using that same object notation.

Reviewer 3: **question**: should we mention that using `toRefs` only for destructuring? Because we're saying that we prefer `reactive` but then we convert it to standalone `refs`

Author: Extremely good point, I'll clear that up.

> You may notice we used `reactive` here instead of `refs`. This is intentional- if you're refactoring a codebase, potentially full of many many values, `reactive` translates faster and more directly as the API is closer to Options, you're still using that same object notation.

Reviewer 4: Is the word 'many' repeated intentionally here?

It might be worth considering moving this paragraph up to be straight after the code for `useToggle.js`. I got distracted because the earlier example was using `reactive` instead of `ref`.

Author: It was, but I made it bold instead, as per this guidance. I'm going to push back on swapping the paragraphs, though, they both reference the code above.

## In Place of Vuex

It is possible to use the Composition API in place of Vuex, and save yourself a dependency. That said, it's not exactly necessary, and like many approaches, there are tradeoffs.

> If you're using Vuex, it's very clear exactly what centralized state is being used across the application. In addition, you gain the benefit of using a standardized pattern that comes with officially supported tooling in the DevTools which can make a big difference when it comes to debugging code.

Reviewer 4: Comma before *'which'*?

Author: I believe two commas is considered comma splicing, but could be persuaded here.

> Composition API is very flexible, but you may lose that implicit declaration in communication to fellow maintainers. Our suggestion that if you do use it as a centralized state management store, that you place it in a `stateManagement` folder, or something similarly named, so that responsibilities are clear.

Reviewer 4: I'd start this paragraph with *'The Composition API'*. It doesn't sound right to me without the *'The'*

Also, I think it needs *'is'* after the word *'suggestion'*.

Author: ```suggestion
The Composition API is very flexible, but you may lose that implicit declaration in communication to fellow maintainers. Our suggestion is that if you do use it as a centralized state management store, that you place it in a `stateManagement` folder, or something similarly named, so that responsibilities are clear.
```

## Components

> It is possible at this point to start to move your components to the Composition API, however, for larger code bases, you may not see immediate need or good reason to, as the Options API works nicely.

Reviewer 4: I think *'codebases'* as a single word is the more common usage. It's already been used that way earlier on this same page.

Author: My spell check says no, it forced me to correct it to what you see here :)

Our suggestion is to use this opportunity to think through the architecture and refactor any larger components that have too much responsibility on their own.

> For instance, if you have a component has the following methods:

Reviewer 4: Missing *'that'*.

Author: ```suggestion
For instance, if you have a component that has the following methods:
```

- one that gathers input from a form
- one that validates that input
- one that uses the input to call out to an API
- one that does something with that API response

You may find that you can potentially create a reusable component for the API call, as on a large application there's a fairly high chance you will need to make another.

For the purposes of demonstration, here's how that one method refactor might look.

### Before, with a Tightly Coupled Method

```js
methods: {
  async getGitHubProjects() {
    try {
      this.isLoading = true
      let projects = await fetch(
        `https://api.github.com/users/sdras/repos?page=1&per_page=100`
      ).then(res => res.json());

      this.gitHubProjects = projects
    } catch (error) {
      this.error = error
      console.error(error);
    } finally {
      this.isLoading = false;
    }
  }
},
created() {
  this.getGitHubProjects()
}
```

> ### After, with Composition API

Reviewer 4: Perhaps a *'the'* before *'Composition API'*?

Author: ```suggestion
### After, with the Composition API
```

```js

> import { reactive, toRefs } from '@vue/composition-api'

Reviewer 4: Vue 2 package.

Author: As mentioned above, the examples are Vue 2 intentionally because the aim is to show how to migrate an existing large Vue 2 application, not a greenfield Vue 3 application

export function useFetchAPI(api, options) {
  const state = reactive({
    response: null,
    isLoading: false,

>     hasErrors: null

Reviewer 4: To me, `hasErrors` sounds like a boolean but that doesn't appear to be how it's used.

Author: I think that could be argued- you can also say "these are the errors the component has", I think I will keep it as-is unless  others agree, if you don't mind.

  })

  const apiCall = async () => {
    state.isLoading = true
    try {
      let res = await fetch(api, options)

>       state.response = await res.json()

Reviewer 4: This version is using `await` twice, whereas the original code used `await` and `then`. Is there a reason for that and could they be both written the same way to avoid the change being a distraction?

Author: Thanks! Fixed!

    } catch (error) {
      state.hasErrors = error
    } finally {
      state.isLoading = false
    }
  }

  return {
    ...toRefs(state),
    apiCall
  }
}
```

And now we can refactor our earlier component like this:

```js
import { useFetchAPI } from '@/composables/useFetchAPI.js'

export default {

>   data() {

Reviewer 3: **question (probably dumb one)**: why do we prefer not to use `setup()` here for returned reactive properties and then combine it with Options API method?

Author: I thought it might be nice to show how it would be used in options for those trying to merge, but am open to other ways of demonstrating

Reviewer 2: Could we be using it in `setup` and then demonstrate how the stuff returned from setup is still accessible as normal instance properties for the rest of the Options-API code?

That way, people see that 

1. this stuff "belongs" into setup (at least with lifecycle methods, it has to go there)
2. But it can still interact with the Options API, though only unidirectionally (setup can't access Options-API methods etc)

I  guess the example would have to be modified/extended for this

Author: Yeah, that's a really good point, I'll update it and make mention of this. Thanks!

Author: This is now updated! Thank you both :) Feel free to let me know if you have you have further changes.

    return {
      gitHubData: [],
      errors: null,
      loading: false
    }
  },
  methods: {

>     async callGitHub() {

Reviewer 4: I don't think there's any need for the `async` here. The function doesn't return anything and it isn't using `await`.

Shouldn't this example still have the `created` hook?

More generally, I find this example a little odd. I guess I'd have expected most of this logic to be in `setup` with `callGitHub` just being the returned alias for `apiCall`. That might just be my lack of experience with the Composition API...

Author: It's not on the created hook because the example is called from a button. While it's possible to call the api with created and then display with a method, that's a lot more for someone to parse while trying to understand something else. The rest is dealt with in another comment, but thanks!

      const { hasErrors, isLoading, response, apiCall } = useFetchAPI(
        `https://api.github.com/users/sdras/repos?page=1&per_page=100`,
        {}
      )

>       apiCall()

Reviewer 3: **question**: shouldn't this be
```suggestion
      await apiCall()
```

Author: yes! whoops

      this.gitHubData = response
      this.errors = hasErrors
      this.loading = isLoading
    }
  }
}
```

<iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/refactor-fetch-with-composition-api-klyji?fontsize=14&hidenavigation=1&theme=dark"
     style="width:100%; height:500px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
     title="Refactor Fetch with Composition API"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

> The second example is reusable throughout the application across multiple components, not just for the gitHub API as the first example shows.

Reviewer 4: Capital G on *'GitHub'*?

I'm struggling a bit to parse the end of this sentence.

Author: ```suggestion
The second example is reusable throughout the application across multiple components, while the first example would only work for the GitHub API.
```

[VueUse](https://vueuse.js.org/) is a great resource to explore that covers many of these encapsulated use cases, ready to use in your application.

## Alternative Patterns

> Not everything needs to be refactored, though. Use data driven refactoring to guide you and avoid pre-optimizing when it's not necessary. The Options API is still a valid approach that will still allow you to build powerful applications. And in the event you find there's a lot of reusable logics and/or state amongst your application, that might be a good time to consider the Composition API to enhance your application!

Reviewer 4: Hyphen in *'data driven'*?

I'm not sure whether *'logics'* is the correct plural here. I'd have gone with *'logic'*.

Author: ```suggestion
Not everything needs to be refactored, though. Use data-driven refactoring to guide you and avoid pre-optimizing when it's not necessary. The Options API is still a valid approach that will still allow you to build powerful applications. And in the event you find there's a lot of reusable logic and/or state amongst your application, that might be a good time to consider the Composition API to enhance your application!
```

Remember: the strength of the Composition API is in:

- Reuse
- Organization
- Explicitly stating what's being returned
- Flexibility

> These same flexible traits that make it easy to compose them mean they can be used for many purposes, so it takes some vigilance to provide clarity those who are reading the code what the purpose may be. We suggest refactoring with that type of organization in mind.

Reviewer 4: I'm unclear what *'them'* and *'they'* refer to here.

I think there are some missing words here too. I think it needs *'for'* before *'those'* and *'as to'* before *'what'*.

Author: Hm, I think this one I will leave as-is, unless I hear from others that it's confusing, I guess I'm unclear on what's unclear :)
